---
weight: 30
bookCollapseSection: true
title: "Firewall"
---

# Firewall system

The LionsOS project contains an example system that acts as a firewall between
networks. Each network interface of the firewall system has its own instance of
an sDDF net subsystem. The firewall multiplexes incoming traffic based on its
protocol, and permits or denies the traffic based on a set of build and run-time
configurable rules. The firewall also acts as a router and can forward traffic
to its next-hop based on a build and run-time configurable routing table. There
are further networking functionalities the firewall is capable of detailed
below. A list of issues and missing features of the firewall we hope to continue
working on can be found
[here](https://github.com/au-ts/lionsos/issues?q=state%3Aopen%20label%3A%22firewall%22).


This page describes the system's architecture and details how it works, if you
are interested in building and running it see the pages on:
* [Hardware setup](./hardware)
* [Building](./building)
* [Running](./running)

## Supported platforms

The system currently only works on the following platform, although we hope to
[expand this in the future](https://github.com/au-ts/lionsos/issues/195):
* Compulab IOT-GATE-IMX8PLUS

Since we currently only support real hardware, to test the firewall system you
will also need to configure subnets and network nodes for each network
interface. For details on this, please see the section on [hardware
setup](./hardware).

## Architecture

Below is a diagram of the architecture of the firewall system containing all the
components. Components with arrows are connected via a Microkit Channel and
shared memory, holding some type of sDDF or firewall
[queue](#firewall-shared-memory-regions) data structure.

Currently, the firewall example only supports two network interfaces (NICs), one
denoted by _external_ (untrusted, referred to as 0), the other _internal_
(trusted, referred to as 1). [We hope to support a variable number in the
future](https://github.com/au-ts/lionsos/issues/196). The
[webserver](#webserver) component, which is used to view and modify filtering
rules and routes, is currently only reachable from the internal network.

<div style="background-color: clear; display: inline-block; padding: 0.5rem">
    <img src="/firewall.svg" alt="Firewall architecture diagram" />
</div>

## Firewall Shared Memory Regions

The firewall implements zero-copy forwarding of packets from reception to
transmission. This requires that the receive DMA region of one NIC be a transmit
DMA region of the other. Additionally, each component that generates packets has
its own transmit DMA region allocated through the sDDF net sub-system.

Aside from network DMA regions, the majority of other shared memory regions hold
single-producer, single-consumer queues. The queue data structures that can be
found in the firewall are:

### sDDF Net Queues

An sDDF net queue is really a _pair_ of queues used to transfer receive or
transmit data buffers between components. sDDF net queues are used when buffers
are to be returned to the same component they are received from. In a typical
sDDF net system this is always the case, however the firewall often requires
components to return buffers to different components. sDDF net queues also use a
signaling protocol to decide when to signal their neighbouring component. More
on sDDF net queues can be found
[here](https://trustworthy.systems/projects/drivers/sddf-design.pdf).

### Firewall Queues

A firewall queue is also used to transfer receive or transmit data buffers,
however it is only one-way. This allows components like the [firewall transmit
virtualiser](#firewall-network-components) to receive buffers from the router,
and return them back to the [firewall receive
virtualiser](#firewall-network-components) upon transmission. Firewall queues,
along with all the following queues, do not use a signaling protocol to
determine when to signal, and instead components signal their neighbour every
time a batch of buffers has been enqueued.

### ARP Queues

An ARP queue is a pair or queues (_request_ and _response_) holding ARP data,
namely IP and MAC addresses, and whether or not an IP is reachable. ARP queues
are used by [routers](#routing-components), [ARP requesters](#arp-components)
and the [webserver](#webserver) to request the MAC address of IPs they wish to
transmit to.

### ICMP Queues

ICMP queues are one-way queues used between the [routers](#routing-components)
and the [ICMP module](#icmp-module) to request that an ICMP packet should be
sent. Currently the ICMP module has limited functionality, however we hope to
[expand on this in the future](https://github.com/au-ts/lionsos/issues/194).

### Other Shared Memory Structures

Not pictured in the diagram are the shared memory regions between components
without a Microkit Channel, namely the filters [_connection
instances_](#filters) regions shared between pairs of filters of the same
protocol.

## Firewall Components

### Firewall Network Components

The firewall network transmit (Tx) and receive (Rx) virtualisers are based on
the sDDF network virtualiser components with minimal modifications, as detailed
in the [sDDF design
document](https://trustworthy.systems/projects/drivers/sddf-design.pdf). The
main modification to both virtualisers is the introduction of [firewall
queues](#firewall-queues) in addition to [sDDF net queues](#sddf-net-queues).
This alters the flow of control of the virtualisers as both queues need to be
handled differently.

#### Rx Virtualiser

The Rx virtualiser has additionally been modified to multiplex based on a
packet's Ethernet type or IPv4 protocol number, rather than the sDDF network Rx
viurtualiser which uses destination MAC address. Packets are forwarded to the
corresponding [ARP](#arp-components) or [filter](#filters) component depending
on the match. The following diagram illustrates how the Rx virtualiser is
connected to its neighbours which it forwards packets to (not pictured is how
buffers are returned to the Rx virtualiser).

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto"
src="/firewall_net_components.svg" alt="Firewall network virtualiser"
width="400" />

As with sDDF network Rx virtualisers, static client queue and protocol
configuration data is generated in the [metaprogram](./building) and copied into
the `.elf` file at build time.

### ARP Components

The firewall contains two distinct ARP components per NIC: the ARP responder
which simply responds to ARP requests addressed to the firewall, and the more
complex ARP requester which is responsible for handling all system ARP requests
for local IPs and maintaining ARP tables.

#### ARP Requester

The ARP requester receives ARP requests from the router, and in the case of the
ARP requester associated with the internal NIC, the webserver component.
Requests, and their eventual responses are passed between components in [ARP
queues](#arp-queues). Requests have the following structure:

```c
typedef enum {
    /* entry is not valid */
    ARP_STATE_INVALID = 0,
    /* IP is pending an arp response */
    ARP_STATE_PENDING,
    /* IP is unreachable */
    ARP_STATE_UNREACHABLE,
    /* IP is reachable, MAC address is valid */
    ARP_STATE_REACHABLE
} fw_arp_entry_state_t;

typedef struct fw_arp_request {
    /* IP address */
    uint32_t ip;
    /* MAC address for IP if response and state is valid */
    uint8_t mac_addr[ETH_HWADDR_LEN];
    /* state of arp response */
    uint8_t state;
} fw_arp_request_t;
```

It is the ARP requesters responsibility to convert this raw ARP request data
into a packet and transmit it out the network. Upon response, the requester will
insert an ARP entry into the ARP table, which the routing component also has
read-only access to. ARP entries have the following structure:

```c

typedef struct fw_arp_entry {
    /* state of this entry */
    uint8_t state;
    /* IP address */
    uint32_t ip;
    /* MAC of IP if IP is reachable */
    uint8_t mac_addr[ETH_HWADDR_LEN];
    /* bitmap of clients that initiated the request */
    uint8_t client;
    /* number of arp requests sent for this IP address */
    uint8_t num_retries;
} fw_arp_entry_t;
```

If after a configurable timeout a response has not been received, the request
will be retransmitted. If a threshold of retries is reached, the IP will be
considered unreachable and an unreachable entry will be added to the ARP table.


After a response is received or an IP is deemed unreachable, an ARP response
will be enqueued with the client who originally requested the MAC address. After
a configurable time interval the ARP table is completely flushed to ensure stale
entries are removed. Time intervals and retry limits can be configured in the
`arp_requester.c` file.

The following diagram shows how the ARP requester is connected to its clients:

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto"
src="/arp_requester.svg" alt="ARP requester connections" width="400" />

#### ARP Responder

The ARP responder is a simple component. It requires only a statically defined
firewall IP and MAC address (obtained as configuration data generated by the
[metaprogram](./building)) to respond to ARP requests addressed to the firewall.
All ARP requests received by the NIC will be routed to the ARP responder, and
responses will only be generated if there is a match with the firewall's local
IP.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto"
src="/arp_responder.svg" alt="ARP responder component" width="500" />

### Filters

Filter components are responsible for determining whether traffic or a certain
IP protocol number should be permitted through the network. They are the first
component to receive non-ARP traffic after the network Rx virtualiser. If it is
decided that a packet is permitted through the firewall, a filter will transfer
the packet to the routing component via a firewall queue. If the packet is not
permitted, it will be returned back to the Rx virtualiser. For each supported
protocol number, there is one filter per interface. Currently, the firewall
contains only ICMP, UDP and TCP filters that share a very similar
implementation. We hope to [extend our protocol specific filtering for TCP
traffic in the future](https://github.com/au-ts/lionsos/issues/186).

To determine whether traffic should be permitted or dropped, filter components
check their filter rules tables. If there is no match, the _default_ rule is
applied. Both the filter rule table and default rule of a filter may be updated
using the [webserver GUI](#webserver). Our current classes of filtering rules
are denoted by `fw_action_t` and are applied to packets whose source and
destination IP addresses and port numbers match against a `fw_rule_t` (the most
specific match is applied in the case of multiple matches):

```c
typedef enum {
    /* no rule exists */
    FILTER_ACT_NONE,
    /* allow traffic */
	FILTER_ACT_ALLOW,
    /* drop traffic */
	FILTER_ACT_DROP,
    /* allow traffic, and additionally any return traffic */
    FILTER_ACT_CONNECT,
    /* traffic is return traffic from a connect rule */
    FILTER_ACT_ESTABLISHED
} fw_action_t;

typedef struct fw_rule {
    /* whether this is a valid rule */
    bool valid;
    /* action to be applied to traffic matching rule */
    uint8_t action;
    /* source IP */
    uint32_t src_ip;
    /* destination IP */
    uint32_t dst_ip;
    /* source port number */
    uint16_t src_port;
    /* destination port number */
    uint16_t dst_port;
    /* source subnet, 0 is any IP */
    uint8_t src_subnet;
    /* destination subnet, 0 is any IP */
    uint8_t dst_subnet;
    /* rule applies to any source port */
    bool src_port_any;
    /* rule applies to any destination port */
    bool dst_port_any;
} fw_rule_t;
```

The `allow` and `drop` are self explanatory, while the `connect` and
`established` actions are related. If a packet matches with a `connect` action,
this implies the filter should allow the packet through the firewall, _as well
as_ any return traffic. This is implemented using a pair of shared memory
regions between matching protocol number filters denoted _instance_ regions.
Upon matching with a `connect` rule, a filter creates a connection instance for
the packet in its instance region. Before filters check their rule table, they
first check their neighbour's instance table to determine if this is permitted
return traffic allowed by their neighbour. If an instance is found, the
`established` action is returned and the traffic is permitted. Upon the deletion
of a `connect` rule, all instances corresponding to that rule are removed.

The following diagram shows the flow of packets through the filters, as well as
the shared instances regions between matching filters.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto"
src="/filter.svg" alt="Filter connections" width="700" />


### Routing Components

Currently there are two routing components, one for each NIC (although we hope
to [change this to one](https://github.com/au-ts/lionsos/issues/191) in the
future). Routers receive packets which have been allowed through the firewall by
the filter components. They are responsible for finding the MAC address of the
next-hop of the the packet and updating the Ethernet header.

The first step of this procedure is to look up the destination IP in the
_routing table_, which is partially configured at build time with the
[metaprogram](./building) and can be re-configured at run-time using the
[webserver](#webserver) component. If multiple matches are found, the more
precise match will be selected. If no route is found the packet will be dropped.

If a next-hop IP address is found, the ARP table is searched to find the
corresponding MAC address. If a valid entry is not found, an ARP request is
generated and enqueued with the ARP requester, and the outgoing packet is
enqueued in a `pkts_waiting_t` linked list grouped by destination IP. If a
valid, reachable entry is found or returned from the ARP requester, the packet
will be updated and transmitted. If the next-hop is found to be unreachable, the
packet will be dropped. When a packet is dropped, the router sends the details
of the packet to the [ICMP module](#icmp-module) so a `destination unreachable`
packet can be transmitted back to the source IP.

The following diagrams demonstrate the flow of packets through the routers. The
first diagram shows the external router, and the second shows the internal. The
only difference being that the internal router has a route to transmit to the
[webserver](#webserver) component.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto"
src="/external_router.svg" alt="External router" width="400" />

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto"
src="/internal_router.svg" alt="Internal router" width="500" />

### ICMP module

Currently the ICMP module's only functionality is to handle the sending of ICMP
`destination unreachable` packets back to senders when a route to a host cannot
be found, however we [hope to expand this in the
future](https://github.com/au-ts/lionsos/issues/194). Unlike most components,
there is only one ICMP module which is able to transmit out both NICs. The ICMP
module also shares ICMP queues with all components that require the generation
of ICMP packets. The diagram below demonstrates the current connections of the
module.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto"
src="/icmp_module.svg" alt="ICMP module" width="500" />

### Webserver

The webserver component provides a basic web GUI for the firewall that can be
accessed via the internal network. It is reachable by the firewall's internal IP
address on port 80. Only TCP traffic is currently permitted. The GUI currently
displays:
- Network interface details (IP, MAC)
- Filtering rules for each filter and interface
- Routing table of each router

The filtering rules and routing table routes can also be added and removed.

The webserver component is the same Micropython component used in the
[webserver](../webserver) example, with slight modifications to how it receives
packets and [handles ARP requests](https://github.com/au-ts/lionsos/issues/179).
It utilises the Micropython
[Microdot](https://github.com/miguelgrinberg/microdot) library to host the
website. The front end Micropython code can be found in `ui_server.py`, and the
back end C module is implemented in `modfirewall.c`.

The following diagram shows how the webserver is connected to the system:

<div style="background-color: clear; display: inline-block; padding: 0.5rem">
    <img src="/firewall_webserver.svg" alt="Webserver component" />
</div>

In contrast to all other connections in the firewall, the webserver uses
protected procedure calls (PPCs) to modify the state of filter and routing
components. Since it is not anticipated the routes and rules will be updated at
a high frequency, this significantly simplifies the interface. The webserver has
all filter rules and routing tables mapped into its address space read-only,
which allows them to efficiently be displayed without disrupting the flow of
traffic through the system. A PPC is only required for modification.
